# sed (Stream Editor)
Used for search and replace

## Substitution

### Basic substitution
Inside single quotes, s for substitution
sed 's/find/replace/' < oldfile.txt > newfile.txt -> What we are doing here is we are asking sed to find 'find' and then replace it with 'replace'
sed 's/Prashik/Raut/'< oldfile.txt > newfile.txt -> Find Prashik and Replace it with Raut
It will replace only first instance of every line of Prashik in the file with Raut

Replace every Prashik with Raut
sed 's/Prashik/Raut/g'< oldfile.txt > newfile.txt
g -> g signifies the global substition. That means that it will replace every instance of Prashik with Raut


### Pipe substitution
echo "Hi Prashik" | sed 's/Prashik/Raut/'
>> Hi Raut

echo "The Emacs file manager is dired" | sed 's/red/green/'
>> The Emacs file manager is digreen

We only want red, and it should start with space and then red.
echo "The Emacs file manager is dired red." | sed 's/ red/green/'
>> The Emacs file manager is diredgreen.

From my understanding, it just searches for the exact string given, and then replaces it.
echo "The Emacs file manager is dired red." | sed 's/ red/ green/'
>> The Emacs file manager is dired green.

### Substituion to the same file
sed -i 's/find/pattern/g' somefile.txt
>> Here, substitutions will occur in the same file.

sed -i 's/Prashik/Raut/g' .bashrc

sed -i 's/Raut/Prashik/g' .bashrc


### Substitution by find the line
sed '/Replace/s/the/THE/' somefile.txt
>> Here, we are telling sed to find the line which contains Replace in it. Now, in that line, replace 'the' with 'THE' for the first instance in the line. If we want global substitution, we can add 'g' at the end of it.

sed '/Replace/s/the/THE/g' somefile.txt
This will be global substitution.


### Deleting lines matching the pattern
sed '/Replace/d' filename.txt
>> Here, sed will search for the line which contains Replace in it, and then delete it.


### Print lines
Print first 11 lines of the file
sed 11q filename.txt


### Multiple pattern search in a single command line
cat somefile.txt | sed -e 's/usr/u/g' -e 's/bin/b/g'
>> Here -e flag tells sed that it will have expression after it. Multiple expressions will require multiple -e flags

What if string pattern that we want to search itself contains slashes (/) in it.
We can escape it as always using backslash in this case.

The separator in the sed can be any special character we want.
It can be (/, # or even |)
sed '#Replace#s#the#THE#g' somefile.txt 
>> This is a valid sed command

sed '|Replace|s|the|THE|g' somefile.txt
>> A valid sed command


### Search pattern in line and print
cat somefile.txt | sed -n '/usr/p'
Now, p flag inside signifies printing.
Using the above command, sed will search for the line containing 'usr' in it, and it will print it.


### Delete extra spaces at the end of the line
sed -i 's/ *$//' somefile.txt
>> We have given regex pattern as ' *$', this will search every line that has spaces at the end of it and replace it with nothing. -i to write to same file.


### Deleting unnecessary tabs at the end of the line.
sed -i 's/[[:space:]]*$//' somefile.txt
>> Here, we can consider [[:space:]] as tab. We are looking for a line which ends with tab and replace it with nothing.


### Deleting empty lines
sed -i '/^$/d' somefile.txt
>> Here, ^ signifies beginning of the line, $ signifies end of the line, and d signifies deleting it. We are essentially telling sed to delete any line that starts and ends with anything in between them (an empty line per se)


### Replace all lowercase characters with uppercase characters
sed -i 's/[a-z]/\U&/g' somefile.txt
>> Here, the search pattern is telling to find anything between a-z, so every lowercase alphabet. \U& tells sed to make them into uppercase and a global substitution because we want to replace every lowercase with uppercase.


### Replace all uppercase characters with lowercase characters
sed -i 's/[A-Z]/\L&/g' somefile.txt
>> Search pattern is telling sed to find anything between A-Z, and \L& is telling sed to replace it with lowercase alphabets and g is signifizing global substitution. 


### Replacement of head command
head somefile.txt
>> Outputs 10 opening lines of the file
sed 11q somefile.txt
>> Outputs 11 opening lines of the file

Better to use awk?
awk 'NR < 13' somefile.txt
>> Outputs 12 opening lines of the file
